Blogpost: The evolution of SciPy CLI (#322)
Quansight-Labs/quansight-labs-site: posts/2022/05/the-evolution-of-the-scipy-developer-cli.md

<!--
.. title: The evolution of the SciPy developer CLI
.. slug: the-evolution-of-the-scipy-developer-cli
.. date: 2022-05-03 8:00:00 UTC+05:30
.. author: Sayantika Banik
.. tags: CLI, SciPy, doit, Typer, Rich, Click
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
.. previewimage:
-->

#### 🤔 What is a command-line interface (CLI)?

> Imagine a situation where there is a massive system with various tools and functionality. Every functionality requires a special command or an input from the user, CLI is designed to tackle such situations. Like a catalog it lists all the options present, helping the user to navigate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine a situation, where there is a massive system with various tools and functionalities, and where every functionality requires a special command or an input from the user. A CLI is designed to tackle such situations. Like a catalog or menu, it lists all the options available, thus helping the user to navigate a complex system.
```

Reviewer: tweaked it a bit for readability mostly. But it's just style, I'm not sure if we have guidelines for comma usage?! So if you don't like it better ignore it. 
I think functionalities should be plural though.

<p align="center">
  <img alt="CLI example" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17350312/166633508-a2795c44-30bc-4a5b-8043-65beab71d31f.png" />
</p>

Now that we understand what a `CLI` is, how about we dive into the world of `SciPy`?

<!-- TEASER_END -->

#### 🤓 SciPy CLI journey

> An open-source project undergoes multiple iterations, and each iteration adds layers of tools and functionalities to incorporate. Right from the initial build, test, benchmarking, release notes, and beyond. Contribution guidelines start spanning across multiple pages, exponentially increasing efforts to maintain.

Reviewer: I think the word incorporate in  the first sentence doesn't quite make sense to me. Maybe `to it` simply?

The next line is also  a bit tricky. I think it's missing a verb? or maybe it's supposed to connec to the next one somehow? but on it's own I can't quite make sense of it...

For the last line I'd make suggest a tweak: `Over time, the contribution guides start to span over more and more pages, as the over all effort to maintain the project grows exponentially" 
(I don't actually know if the growth is exponential, I'm taking your lead here 😉 )

Author: Over time, the contribution guides start to span over more and more pages, `as` the over all effort to maintain the project grows exponentially

Thanks for the suggestion :)
Perhaps we could replace `as` with `and`, the result and outcome sound opposite here.

Reviewer: both work!
`as` makes a causal links. the guide is growing because the the maintenance effort is grow. 
`and` just means both these things happen. no causality implied.

The two homegrown CLI for SciPy are `runtests.py`(for distutils-based builds) and `dev.py`(for Meson-based builds) built using python tooling `argparse`.

> Both of these toolings have multiple conditional blocks to achieve the desired outcome. Not only it is difficult to maintain, overall readability decreases drastically. The documentation runs into an infinite loop of updates, requiring additional efforts from maintainers. Another issue that remains is the lack of task grouping. A group of tasks linking to a single objective helps reduce confusion, super helpful for new contributors (like me :D).

Reviewer: Is `toolings` SciPy lingo or some term I'm not aware of? if not I word amend it to `tools`. 
the context for mentioning the conditionals isn't super clear to me. Why is this piece of  information interesting/relevant in an already information heavy paragraph?  If you think it's interesting for people who have knowledge I lack, do keep it. If you think it's interesting for new contributors , maybe add some insight as to why, like you do so well later on. If it's not critical, suggest to edit to `Both of these tools are hard to maintain, their overall readability decreases  ...`

Author: It's not a SciPy lingo (maybe just me using the term), I shall update the wording. Thanks for pointing :)

By conditional blocks, I was trying to infer multiple `if-else` statements. Maybe replacing the term `conditional` with the `if-else` along with an example could be helpful?

Reviewer: Oh yeah, I understand that the conditionals mean if-end statements. I just don't understand why that information is relevant to the story you are telling me. Is it particularly interesting? It just seems like a very specific detail to mention here that isn't connected to the rest of the paragraph. Are conditionals notoriously hard to maintain and I'm missing the point?

Author: Long chains of conditional statements degrade code readability. Makes it harder to find the right block to update/modify something. 

Each conditional block is designed to pick a specific user input and perform certain actions. 
`if user_input==--test ...perform x`
     `else:___`
 `if user_input==--bench ...perform y`
      `else:___`
  This spans to multiple other blocks.
  
  I can remove the conditional wording or try adding a similar example.

Reviewer: Ah, the way you explain it now is much more clear to me than the original text. May I suggest you amend to incorporate your new phrasing:
`Both of these tools have long chains of conditional statements, **which** are notorious for reducing code readability drastically. **That** makes it difficult to maintain such code, because it is harder to find the right block to modify.`

Now that you explained I can also understand the original 2 lines easily tbh. But originally, I didn't get the connection between  the first line and the second line.  In the suggestion I made I try to make the connection a bit stronger. so the reader understands the conditionals are the cause of the problem. But feel free to rewrite in your style.

> Hence the idea of a developer command-line interface (CLI) was born. Easing the development experience with an intuitive and informative CLI. Removing dependency on legacy tooling like `paver` also added great value to the overall experience. Additional details could be found under [issue-#15489](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/15489)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus the idea of a developer command-line interface (CLI) was born, easing the development experience with an intuitive and informative CLI. In addition, we would be removing dependency on legacy tooling like `paver`, which would also add great value to the overall experience. Additional details could be found under [issue-#15489](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/15489)
```

Reviewer: Thus sounds better imo. this is mostly readability again. content looks great.

#### ✍️ Planning and objective

> Like any development activity, the goal was to experiment with tools available [doit](https://pydoit.org/) and [Typer](https://typer.tiangolo.com/) were the first ones we picked. The two components of our interests were a *task runner*, and a *command-line interface tool*. doit satisfied the requirements of a task runner along with added functionality like maintaining a task dependency graph as a `DAG`. While `Typer` is quick to get started with building CLI applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like any development activity, the plan was to experiment with available tools. [doit](https://pydoit.org/) and [Typer](https://typer.tiangolo.com/) were the first ones we picked. The two components of our interests were a *task runner*, and a *command-line interface tool*. doit satisfied the requirements of a task runner along with added functionality, like maintaining a task dependency graph as a `DAG`. While `Typer` is quick to get started with building CLI applications.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure if DAG is very familiar to people. Maybe link it to wiki?

Author: Sounds good. 
I found this article easy to understand - https://hazelcast.com/glossary/directed-acyclic-graph/ 
The wiki one seemed very detailed, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph

> As a starting point, I began experimenting with existing `dev.py` options, wrapped around multiple composite `doit` and `Typer` tasks. Both the [doit POC](https://github.com/sayantikabanik/scipy/blob/cli_poc/dodo.py) and [Typer POC](https://github.com/sayantikabanik/scipy/blob/cli_poc/cli.py) were built with similar principles.

Reviewer: Before using POC for the first time. Write it as `Proof of concept (POC)` and then you can continue with the shorter version. (though some people prefer to be even more explicit and write `Proof of concept (from now on POC for short)` or something like this 🤷🏽‍♀️. I think it's ok to use the former for blogs.

Not sure I understand what's `multiple composite doit and Typer tasks`.  Feels like I really need a lot of cognitive load to get into what a CLI to figure it out and I 'd rather that you tell me in simpler words if I'm skimming this blog or I'm a beginner. 

Also you say that both POCs were built with similar principles, but you don't state principle**s** after it. So Am I supposed to infer it's this wrapping of something I didn't bother to understand in the line before? I feel like either I missed something, or something is missing and I can't tell 🤷🏽‍♀️

(I know I'm being a bit purposefully difficult but I'm trying to think like a casual blog reader and ppl that visit our blogs spend a couple of minutes reading, and even then it might be that some aren't as technical as you are).

> As I progressed with the development of POCs using both tools, I experienced certain shortcomings. A better way to integrate an external library for exposing a CLI was the missing piece. **Eduardo Naufel Schettino** the author of doit developed an architecture combining the core elements of `doit` along with `click`. The journey in detail is captured under [issue-#133](https://github.com/rgommers/scipy/issues/133).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I progressed with the development of POCs using both tools, I experienced certain shortcomings. A better way to integrate an external library for exposing a CLI was the missing piece. **Eduardo Naufel Schettino** the author of doit developed an architecture combining the core elements of `doit` along with `click`. The journey is captured  in detail under [issue-#133](https://github.com/rgommers/scipy/issues/133).
```

Reviewer: word order

Reviewer: Is this where you say you move from 2 POCs to only doit+click? I read on a bit and it seems like  the rest doesn't include Typer. I think it's not super clear. Maybe add something at the end of this like, `henceforth I continued with a doit+click POC, but it's not quite the end yet...`? feel free to rewrite.

#### 💁🏽‍♀️ More about the architecture and core components

> Combining these tools wasn’t a straightforward journey; after multiple iterations, we were able to achieve a stable state. Doit underwent updates to incorporate added functionality, helping the pieces come together live. Below are the core components for the `doit-click` based task definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Combining these tools wasn’t a straightforward journey; after multiple iterations, we were able to achieve a stable state. Doit underwent updates to incorporate added functionalities, helping the pieces come to life together. Below are the core components for the `doit-click` based task definition.
```

Reviewer: Were the doit updates at your request? or were you just impacted by their project development? or did you/scipy team contribute to their project in order for it better match your needs? 
Because any of those is a cool detail to add!

I'm assuming it was more than one functionality based on what you wrote so I amended it to plural.

You can also remove `to life` or `together`, (I think having both is a bit redundant), and it works just as well. I think I would prefer it without `to life` personally. It give me weird vibes personally 🧟  but it's totally fine 😉  people use it all the time.

Author: The collaboration with Eduardo provided visibility wrt to the design choices and any additional doit updates. As the project progressed the required requirements/additions were made.

1. ✍️ Click based approach to input arguments/options/parameters
2. ☑️ Base class to define doit task and/or click command
3. 🏃 Method to execute a task `run()`
4. 🌟 Additional utilities like `task dependency` and metadata definition using class attribute `TASK_META`

> ##### Class based Click command definition

Author: Made a tiny addition for more clarity 
Below are the core components for the doit-click based task definition along with an `illustration`.

```python
@cli.cls_cmd('test')
class Test():
    """Run tests"""
    @classmethod
    def run(cls):
        print('Running tests...')
```

> - Command may make use of a Click.Group context defining a `ctx` class attribute

Reviewer: **A** command or **Any** command. I'm missing a determinator in the beginning.. 
It's ok in the next line because `command options` is plural (thought you can write `The command options`). 

Since both of these bullets describe changes you introduce in the next example/illustration/deepdive, consider adding a line saying, `as you can see in the next code chunk/snippet/following` or maybe tag your code illustrations? like fig1. fig2.  but code snippet 1, code snippet 2? I don't know - maybe it's overkill but right now it's a bit hard to follow for neurodiverse people (NDs) in my opinion. (which often means other people will also appreciate it if it was a bit more clear 😉).

Author: The tags render beautifully in my code editor, I checked in deploy preview it doesn't look well 😕
![Screenshot 2022-05-09 at 11 10 30 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17350312/167347337-7a7351da-7d0d-4b40-a771-e2fd878303ca.png)

Reviewer: @sayantikabanik based on https://getnikola.com/handbook.html#markdown I'm gathering that the markdown (MD) flavour for our blog is python MD which follows these syntax rules: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax. 

Alas, it looks like Python MD doesn't support MD tables, which I believe is what you did with your tags? But you should be able to insert a table html tag, if you want to keep it that way (search for the word `table` on that page for a simple example). Or you can change the style to an emphasis (double underscore maybe?) or subheading (just the next level down?) if you'd rather avoid html and stick to pure MD.

I hope my advice here is correct 🤞 since I haven't tried it out myself. I simply tried to find out what the right MD flavour for your tag to render 😉. Let me know how it goes...

Author: Thanks, @noatamir 😊 I updated the HTML table tag. Though it wasn't standing out as I expected. Hence switching to `Blockquote`.

Reviewer: thought maybe now it also works without saying `additional details` there? not sure...

Below is a simple example which demonstrates the grouping of options and tasks along with style settings.
```python

# style and markdown setting
rich_click.STYLE_ERRORS_SUGGESTION = "yellow italic"
rich_click.USE_MARKDOWN = True

# grouping global and task based options
rich_click.OPTION_GROUPS = {
    "do.py": [
        {
            "name": "Options",
            "options": [
                "--help", "--build-dir", "--no-build", "--install-prefix"],
        },
    ],

    "do.py test": [
        {
            "name": "Options",
            "options": ["--help", "--verbose", "--parallel", "--coverage"],
        },
    ],
}
# adding tasks into groups
rich_click.COMMAND_GROUPS = {
    "do.py": [
        {
            "name": "environments",
            "commands": ["shell", "python", "ipython"],
        },
        {
            "name": "release",
            "commands": ["notes", "authors"],
        },
    ]
}
```

#### 🎥 The developer CLI in action

<script id="asciicast-U9l9VvklvEjXdEi1xYS4A7u5M" src="https://asciinema.org/a/U9l9VvklvEjXdEi1xYS4A7u5M.js" async></script>

> 

Reviewer: I <3 all of this section! so cool!

#### Current list of implemented tasks
Below are the lists of tasks currently implemented as part of the developer CLI. This list is dynamic and subject to change in the coming months.

* `Build & testing tasks`
     - build (build & install package on path)
     - test (Run tests along with options to run tests for a given submodule)
* `Static checker tasks`
     - pep8 ( Perform pep8 check with flake8)
     - mypy ( Run mypy on the codebase)
* `Environments`
     - shell (Start Unix shell with PYTHONPATH set)
     - python (Start a Python shell with PYTHONPATH set)
     - ipython (Start IPython shell with PYTHONPATH set )
* `Documentation tasks`
     - doc (Build documentation)
     - refguide-check  (Run refguide check)

* `Release tasks`
    -  notes   (Release notes and log generation)
    -  authors  (Task to generate list the authors who contributed within a given revision interval)
* `Benchmarking tasks`
    - bench & bench compare

> 

Reviewer: excellent! very clear. is the empty line in the bullet list a problem in MD rendering? I don't recall...

Author: Markdown I believe. I checked the preview it's rendered properly there

#### 👏🏽 Great Collaboration and teamwork

From an idea to developing a successful POC, the journey was a great learning opportunity for me. Planning, coordination, teamwork and clear communication played a very important role. Huge thanks to **Ralf Gommers** and **Eduardo Naufel Schettino** for the amazing collaboration and support.

> As a newcomer to the *SciPy codebase*, it was a steep learning curve. I asked a ton of questions, at times drifted to the ocean searching for answers. Learning something completely new be overwhelming, different emotions brush past. Thanks to Ralf and **Pamphile Roy** for addressing my questions. The learnings and achievements will stay with me for a long-long time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a newcomer to the *SciPy codebase*, it was a steep learning curve. I asked a ton of questions, at times drifted to the ocean searching for answers. Learning something completely new can be overwhelming, different emotions brush past. Thanks to Ralf and **Pamphile Roy** for addressing my questions. The learnings and achievements will stay with me for a long-long time.
```

> #### 😇 The possibilities next steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 😇 The next steps
```

Reviewer: concise and clear.

The experimental CLI is available under `scipy/do.py` for the wider community to test and provide us with valuable feedback.
Some of the handy commands to quickly try out the CLI -
- Enabling the GUI: `python do.py`
- Listing the args/options for a task: `python do.py <task_name> --help`

> **Outcomes**

1. 📜 Self-documentation and hierarchical help option
2. 🧭 Easy to navigate and intuitive interface
3. ⏩ Clear and concise examples to get started quickly
4. ⏱ Reduction in the time spent navigating documentation

With a great start comes possibilities. In the coming weeks, the CLI will become more mature and stable. After we receive wider usage and acceptance from the community, support for `dev.py` and `runtests.py` will be paused and `do.py` will be renamed to `dev.py`. The user documentation for the CLI components and usage will be made available for clear and concise understanding.
To foster reusability, Eduardo has developed a package named `pydevtool`. The reusable elements will be incorporated into the SciPy developer CLI code. We will also be adding support for `act`, which will enable users to run GitHub CI jobs locally.

> 

Reviewer: This all sounds great!! I would only encourage you to think if you can say something about how when do.py becomes dev.py it is officially no longer a POC. 👏 for the work. This is very cool. excellent blog and project!

Author: Currently, I don't have an idea of when that might be feasible and do.py becomes the single CLI. Though I believe it would be a gradual shift after we receive wider acceptance from the community.

#### 🙂 Parting thoughts

Many thanks to the wonderful community for all the support and guidance.

> We are excited to collaborate with projects looking forward to adapting a similar developer command-line interface.

Reviewer: Since I'm curious about this myself. Do you plan to document something about how might build a doit+click tool in general so that others might follow this template? It can go on Scientific-Python.org as maintainer documentation 😉 😉 😉 😉 😉 😉
